README.md, before:

<div align="center">

# [AAAI2026] AURORA: Augmented Understanding via Structured Reasoning and Reinforcement Learning for Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation

**Approach**: [[arxiv Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2508.02149)

</div>

## Overview
Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation (Ref-AVS) tasks challenge models to precisely locate sounding objects by integrating visual, auditory, and textual cues. Existing methods
often lack genuine semantic understanding, tending to memorize fixed reasoning patterns. Furthermore, jointly training for reasoning and segmentation can compromise pixel-level
precision. To address these issues, we introduce AURORA, a novel framework designed to enhance genuine reasoning and language comprehension in reference audio-visual segmentation. We employ a structured Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting mechanism to guide the model through a step-by-step reasoning process and introduce a novel segmentation
feature distillation loss to effectively integrate these reasoning abilities without sacrificing segmentation performance. To further cultivate the model’s genuine reasoning capabilities, we devise a further two-stage training strategy: first, a “corrective reflective-style training” stage utilizes self-correction to enhance the quality of reasoning paths, followed by reinforcement learning via Group Reward Policy Optimization (GRPO) to bolster robustness in challenging scenarios. Experiments demonstrate that AURORA achieves state-of-the-art performance on Ref-AVS benchmarks and generalizes effectively to unreferenced segmentation.

<img src="https://github.com/Sssssuperior/AURORA/blob/main/model3_00.png">

## Environmental Setups
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
## Data Preparation
For training, we provide SFT data generated using Qwen-OMNI-7B in Stage1 [[baidu](https://pan.baidu.com/s/1sX_uo8nySPsPrIY7kyozSQ?pwd=6wrg),PIN:6wrg], as well as data modified with Gemini in Stage2 [[baidu](https://pan.baidu.com/s/1jU34YONEngdDELSE4PalBA?pwd=p37y),PIN:p37y]. We encourage readers to use even stronger models to generate even better data.

## Start Training
For training, please run the following scripts and change the visible device according to yourself.
```
deepspeed --num_gpus=2 train_ds.py
```
For testing, 
```
deepspeed --num_gpus=2 train_ds_test.py
```

We also provide the checkpoint in [[baidu](),PIN]:. **Due to the limited storage capacity of my Google Drive, I am unable to upload additional files there. If you can only access the data via Google Drive and are unable to use Baidu Cloud, please contact me by email. (ziyangluo1110@gmail.com).**

## Citation
If you use AURORA in your research or wish to refer to the baseline results, please use the following BibTeX entry.
If you have any questions, please contact me: ziyangluo1110@gmail.com
```
@article{luo2025aurora,
  title={AURORA: Augmented Understanding via Structured Reasoning and Reinforcement Learning for Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation},
  author={Luo, Ziyang and Liu, Nian and Khan, Fahad Shahbaz and Han, Junwei},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02149},
  year={2025}
}
```

Commit message:

Update README with model files and training details
Added model files section with descriptions of Python scripts used in training and evaluation.

README.md, after:

<div align="center">

# [AAAI2026] AURORA: Augmented Understanding via Structured Reasoning and Reinforcement Learning for Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation

**Approach**: [[arxiv Paper]](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2508.02149)

</div>

## Overview
Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation (Ref-AVS) tasks challenge models to precisely locate sounding objects by integrating visual, auditory, and textual cues. Existing methods
often lack genuine semantic understanding, tending to memorize fixed reasoning patterns. Furthermore, jointly training for reasoning and segmentation can compromise pixel-level
precision. To address these issues, we introduce AURORA, a novel framework designed to enhance genuine reasoning and language comprehension in reference audio-visual segmentation. We employ a structured Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting mechanism to guide the model through a step-by-step reasoning process and introduce a novel segmentation
feature distillation loss to effectively integrate these reasoning abilities without sacrificing segmentation performance. To further cultivate the model’s genuine reasoning capabilities, we devise a further two-stage training strategy: first, a “corrective reflective-style training” stage utilizes self-correction to enhance the quality of reasoning paths, followed by reinforcement learning via Group Reward Policy Optimization (GRPO) to bolster robustness in challenging scenarios. Experiments demonstrate that AURORA achieves state-of-the-art performance on Ref-AVS benchmarks and generalizes effectively to unreferenced segmentation.

<img src="https://github.com/Sssssuperior/AURORA/blob/main/model3_00.png">

## Environmental Setups
```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
## Data Preparation
For training, we provide SFT data generated using Qwen-OMNI-7B in Stage1 [[baidu](https://pan.baidu.com/s/1sX_uo8nySPsPrIY7kyozSQ?pwd=6wrg),PIN:6wrg], as well as data modified with Gemini in Stage2 [[baidu](https://pan.baidu.com/s/1jU34YONEngdDELSE4PalBA?pwd=p37y),PIN:p37y]. We encourage readers to use even stronger models to generate even better data.

### Model Files
The `model` folder contains three Python files, each corresponding to a specific stage of the training and evaluation pipeline:
- **`LISA_ref.py`**  
  Used in **Stage 1 (SFT training)**.
- **`LISA_grpo.py`**  
  Used in the **GRPO reinforcement learning stage**.
- **`LISA.py`**  
  Used for **inference/testing**.

## Start Training
For training, please run the following scripts and change the visible device according to yourself.
```
deepspeed --num_gpus=2 train_ds.py
```
For testing, 
```
deepspeed --num_gpus=2 train_ds_test.py
```

We also provide the checkpoint in [[baidu](),PIN]:. 

**Due to the limited storage capacity of my Google Drive, I am unable to upload additional files there. If you can only access the data via Google Drive and are unable to use Baidu Cloud, please contact me by email. (ziyangluo1110@gmail.com).**

## Citation
If you use AURORA in your research or wish to refer to the baseline results, please use the following BibTeX entry. If you have any questions, please contact me: ziyangluo1110@gmail.com
```
@article{luo2025aurora,
  title={AURORA: Augmented Understanding via Structured Reasoning and Reinforcement Learning for Reference Audio-Visual Segmentation},
  author={Luo, Ziyang and Liu, Nian and Khan, Fahad Shahbaz and Han, Junwei},
  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02149},
  year={2025}
}
```
